JOSS paper submission (#200)
Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch: paper/paper.md

   index: 1
 - name: NVIDIA, UK
   index: 2
 - name: Scientific Computing Department, Science and Technology Facilities Council, UK
   index: 3
 - name: University of Kent, UK
   index: 4
date: 25 March 2024
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

In the last decade, machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques have
revolutionised many fields within science, industry, and beyond.
Researchers across domains are increasingly seeking to combine ML
with numerical modelling to advance research.
This typically brings about the challenge of _programming
language interoperation_. PyTorch [@paszke2019pytorch] is a popular framework for
designing and training ML/DL models whilst Fortran remains a language of choice for many
high-performance computing (HPC) scientific models.
The `FTorch` library provides an easy-to-use, performant, cross-platform method for
coupling the two, allowing users to call PyTorch models from Fortran.

`FTorch` is open-source, open-development, and well-documented with minimal dependencies.
A central tenet of its design, in contrast to other approaches, is
that FTorch removes dependence on the Python runtime (and virtual environments).

> By building on the `LibTorch` backend (written in C++ and accessible via an API) it
> allows users to run ML models on both
> CPU and GPU architectures without the need for porting code to device-specific languages.

Reviewer: Very minor suggested tweak
```suggestion
By building on the `LibTorch` backend (written in C++ and accessible via an API) it
allows users to run ML models on both
CPU and GPU architectures without needing to port code to device-specific languages.
```

`FTorch` bridges this gap, reducing the burden on researchers
seeking to incorporate ML into their numerical models.
It provides an intuitive and user-friendly interface from Fortran
to ML models developed using PyTorch.
It removes the need for detailed knowledge about language interoperation
and the need to develop bespoke coupling code, instead providing a Fortran interface
designed to be familiar to both PyTorch and Fortran users.

Having no dependence on the Python runtime, `FTorch` avoids the
incurred overhead of object representations in Python's runtime and
is appealing for HPC systems where the management of
Python environments can be challenging.

# Software description

`FTorch` is a Fortran wrapper to the `LibTorch` C++ framework using the `iso_c_binding`
module, intrinsic to Fortran since the 2003 standard
This enables shared memory use (where possible) to
maximise efficiency by reducing data-transfer during coupling^[i.e. the same
data in memory is used by both `LibTorch` and Fortran without creating a copy.]
and avoids any use of Python at runtime.
PyTorch types are represented through derived types in `FTorch`, with Tensors supported

> across a range of data types and ranks by using the `fypp` preprocessor [@fypp].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across a range of data types and ranks using the `fypp` preprocessor [@fypp].
```

`torch_tensor`s are targeted to a device through a
`device_type` enum, currently supporting CPU, CUDA, XPU, and MPS.
Multiple GPUs may be targeted through the optional `device_index` argument.

Typically, users train a model in PyTorch and save it as TorchScript, a strongly-typed
subset of Python.
`FTorch` provides a utility script (`pt2ts.py`) to assist users with this process.
The Torchscript model is then loaded by `FTorch` and run using `LibTorch`.

The following provides a minimal representative example:

```fortranfree
use ftorch
...
type(torch_model) :: model
type(torch_tensor), dimension(n_inputs)  :: model_inputs
type(torch_tensor), dimension(n_outputs) :: model_outputs
...
call torch_model_load(model, "/path/to/saved_TorchScript_model.pt", torch_kCPU)
call torch_tensor_from_array(model_inputs(1),  fortran_inputs,  &
                             in_layout, torch_kCPU)
call torch_tensor_from_array(model_outputs(1), fortran_outputs, &
                             out_layout, torch_kCPU)
...
call torch_model_forward(model, model_inputs, model_outputs)
...
call torch_delete(model)
call torch_delete(model_inputs)
call torch_delete(model_outputs)
...
```

> Included with `FTorch` is a directory of examples covering an extensive range of use
> cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FTorch` includes a directory of examples covering an extensive range of use
cases.
```

language interoperation_. PyTorch is a popular framework for designing and
training ML/DL models whilst Fortran remains a language of choice for many
high-performance computing (HPC) scientific models.
The `FTorch` library provides an easy-to-use, performant method for coupling
the two, allowing users to call PyTorch models from Fortran.

`FTorch` is open-source, open-development, and well-documented with minimal dependencies.
A central tenet of its design, in contrast to other approaches, is
that FTorch removes dependence on the Python runtime (and virtual environments).
By building on the `LibTorch` backend it allows users to run ML models on both
CPU and GPU architectures without the need for porting code to device-specific languages.

# Statement of need

The explosion of ML/DL has brought several promising opportunities
to deploy these techniques in scientific research.
There are notable applications in the physical sciences [@carleo2019machine],
climate science [@kashinath2021physics],
and materials science [@bishara2023state].
Common applications include the emulation of computationally intensive processes
and the development of data-driven components.

> Such deployments of ML can achieve higher computational
> performance and/or improved predictive performance,
> compared to traditional numerical techniques.

Reviewer: Trim suggestion
```suggestion
Such deployments of ML can achieve improved computational and/or predictive performance,
compared to traditional numerical techniques.
```

> A common example from the geosciences is the development of ML parameterisations
> of subgrid processes - currently a major source of uncertainty in many models.

Reviewer: Trim suggestion
```suggestion
A common example from the geosciences is ML parameterisation
of subgrid processes - a major source of uncertainty in many models.
```

Fortran is widely used for scientific codes due to its performance,
stability, array-oriented design, and native support for shared and distributed memory,
amongst other features [@kedward2022state].
Many ML frameworks, on the other hand, are accessed using Python.
A commonly-used framework is PyTorch [@paszke2019pytorch] which
allows users to design and deploy ML models with many advanced features.

Ideally users would develop and validate ML models in the PyTorch environment
before deploying them into a scientific model.

> This deployment should be possible with minimal additional code, and guarantee
> identical results to those obtained with the PyTorch
> interface -- something not guaranteed if re-implementing by hand in Fortran.

Reviewer: Trim suggestion
```suggestion
This deployment should require minimal additional code, and guarantee
identical results as obtained with the PyTorch
interface -- something not guaranteed if re-implementing by hand in Fortran.
```

`FTorch` bridges this gap, reducing the burden on researchers
seeking to incorporate ML into their numerical models.
It provides an intuitive and user-friendly interface from Fortran
to ML models developed using PyTorch.
It removes the need for detailed knowledge about language interoperation
and the need to develop bespoke coupling code, instead providing a Fortran interface
designed to be familiar to both PyTorch and Fortran users.

Having no dependence on the Python runtime, `FTorch` avoids the
incurred overhead of object representations in Python's runtime and
is appealing for HPC systems where the management of
Python environments can be challenging.

# Software description

PyTorch itself builds on an underlying `C++` framework `LibTorch` which can be obtained
as a separate library accessible through a `C++` API.
By accessing this directly (rather than via PyTorch), `FTorch` avoids the use of Python at run-time.

Using the `iso_c_binding` module, intrinsic to Fortran since the 2003 standard,
we provide a Fortran wrapper to `LibTorch`.
This enables shared memory use (where possible) to
maximise efficiency by reducing data-transfer during coupling.^[i.e. the same

> data in memory is used by both `LibTorch` and `Fortran` without creating a copy.]

Reviewer: Typo?
```suggestion
data in memory is used by both `LibTorch` and `FTorch` without creating a copy.]
```

Reviewer: Or was it meant to be this?
```suggestion
data in memory is used by both `LibTorch` and Fortran without creating a copy.]
```

`FTorch` is [open source](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch).
It can be built from source using CMake.
Minimum dependencies are `LibTorch`, CMake,
and Fortran (2008 standard), `C`, and `C++` (`C++17` standard) compilers.^[To utilise GPU devices, users require the appropriate `LibTorch` binary plus any relevant dependencies, e.g. CUDA for NVIDIA devices.]
The library is primarily developed in Linux, but also runs on macOS and Windows.

## Key components and workflow leveraging FTorch

#. Build, train, and validate a model in PyTorch.
#. Save model as TorchScript, a strongly-typed subset of Python.
#. Write Fortran using the `FTorch` module to:
   - load the TorchScript model;
   - create Torch tensors from Fortran arrays;
   - run the model for inference;
   - use the returned data as a Fortran array;
   - deallocate any temporary FTorch objects;
#. Compile the Fortran code, linking to the FTorch installation.

PyTorch tensors are represented by `FTorch` as a `torch_tensor` derived type, and
created from Fortran arrays using the `torch_tensor_from_array()` subroutine.

> Tensors are supported across a range of data types up to rank
> 5^[easily extendable at build time for users who require more.]
> using the fypp preprocessor [@fypp]

Reviewer: Trim suggestion
```suggestion
Tensors are supported across a range of data types and ranks
using the fypp preprocessor [@fypp]
```

Author: Was unsure, but now agree this is perhaps excessive.

## Examples and Tooling

`FTorch` includes a directory of documented examples covering basic use,
running with multiple inputs/outputs, using (multiple) GPU devices, and structuring code
for deployment in scientific applications.
They guide users through the full workflow from Python to Fortran.

These examples underpin the integration testing suite that checks
`FTorch` performs as expected in end-to-end workflows.
There is also a unit testing suite based on [pFUnit](https://github.com/Goddard-Fortran-Ecosystem/pFUnit).
Both are run as part of a Continuous Integration workflow over various
platforms and compilers.
Other components include fypp templating checks and code quality checks using
fortitude [@fortitude] for Fortran, clang-format [@clangformat] and
clang-tidy [@clangtidy] for `C` and `C++`, and ruff [@ruff] for Python.

The library also provides a script (`pt2ts.py`) to assist users with
saving PyTorch models to TorchScript.

# Comparison to other approaches

* **Replicating a net in Fortran**\
  That is, taking a model developed in PyTorch and reimplementing
  it using only Fortran, loading saved weights from file.

>   This is likely to require considerable development effort, re-writing code
>   that already exists and missing opportunities to use the diverse and highly-optimised

Reviewer: Trim suggestion
```suggestion
  This is likely to involve considerable development effort, duplication,
  and missing opportunities to use the diverse and highly-optimised
```

Author: I think I chose to stick with 're-writing' to emphasise that this is not "copy and pasting" code, but a re-implementation of existing functionality in another language/library.

  error, requiring additional testing to ensure correctness.\
  If the overall goal is to incorporate ML into Fortran, rather than using PyTorch
  specifically, then another approach is to leverage a Fortran-based ML framework
  such as [neural-fortran](https://github.com/modern-fortran/neural-fortran) [@curcic2019parallel].
  Whilst it does not allow interaction with PyTorch, neural-fortran provides
  many neural network components for building nets directly in Fortran.
  However, the set of features is not as rich as PyTorch and GPU offloading
  is not currently supported.\
  The [Fiats](https://berkeleylab.github.io/fiats) (`Functional Inference And Training
  for Surrogates') package is another approach for developing, training, and deploying
  ML models directly in Fortran, with experimental GPU support at present.

* **Forpy** [@forpy]\
  Forpy is a Fortran module that provides access to Python data structures (including `numpy` arrays)
  for interoperability.
  Whilst this provides wider access to general Python features it has a
  challenging interface with more boilerplate. It also requires access to the Python
  runtime from Fortran.

* **TorchFort** [@torchfort]\

>   Since we began `FTorch` NVIDIA has released `torchfort`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Since we began `FTorch` NVIDIA has released `TorchFort`.
```
for consistency with the above

  This has a similar approach to `FTorch`, avoiding Python to link against
  the `LibTorch` backend. It has a focus on enabling GPU deployment on NVIDIA hardware.

* **fortran-tf-lib** [@fortran-tf-lib]\

>   Whilst `FTorch` allows coupling of PyTorch models to Fortran,
>   some TensorFlow [@Abadi_TensorFlow_Large-scale_machine_2015] to
>   develop and train models. These can be coupled to

Reviewer: Missing word?
```suggestion
  Whilst `FTorch` allows coupling of PyTorch models to Fortran,
  some use TensorFlow [@Abadi_TensorFlow_Large-scale_machine_2015] to
  develop and train models. These can be coupled to
```

  Fortran in a similar manner to `FTorch` by using `fortran-tf-lib`.
  Whilst it provides an alternative solution, the library is less rich in features and
  software sustainability than `FTorch`.

* **SmartSim** [@partee2022using]\
  SmartSim is a workflow library developed by HPE and built upon Redis API.
  It provides a framework for launching ML and HPC workloads transferring data
  between the two via a database.
  This is a versatile approach that can work with a variety of languages and ML
  frameworks. However, it has a significant learning curve, incurs data-transfer
  overheads, and requires managing tasks from Python.

# Examples of Use

`FTorch` is actively used in scientific research:

* in the [DataWave project](https://datawaveproject.github.io/) to
  couple a neural net emulation for gravity wave drag to an atmospheric
  model [@MiMAML] demonstrating variability of models trained offline when coupled to a
  host [@mansfield2024uncertainty].

* to couple a U-Net based model of multi-scale convection into [ICON](https://www.icon-model.org/)

>   (the Icosahedral Non-hydrostatic modelling framework) and demonstrate via Shapley values that

Reviewer: Could we get away with not expanding the acronym for ICON? We provide a link and, while it's a well-known model in the field, I've never seen the acronym expanded before.

Author: Done.

>   (the Icosahedral Non-hydrostatic modelling framework) and demonstrate via Shapley values that

Author: ```suggestion
  and demonstrate via Shapley values that
```
